Hello everyone and welcome to this section on ARIMA models.
So we're not going to discuss one of the most common time series models Arema which stands for our aggressive
integrated moving averages.
And please note that this is an optional section of the course so for various reasons that we're going
to be discovering later on Arema models by themselves really often don't work well.
Historical stock or securities data however they are so commonly used and so fundamental to understanding
time series analysis that it's still worth the time to go over them.
So for other time series analysis things such as trying to predict how many sales a store will do during
the winter or in the summer.
Things of that nature Arema models are fantastic when it comes to actual financial data.
They don't tend to actually work that well and later on we'll discover why.
But in order to do that we actually understand how Arema models work and as we continue with this topic
please keep in mind that Arema models can actually be quite complex.
So make sure to make full use of the various links and extra resources that are presented throughout
this section.
If you want to later use Arema models for other applications or other problems.
All right so let's discuss Ario models in general.
So there are a regressive integrated moving average models and it's a generalization of another model
known as the Armah model or auto regressive moving average.
Both of these models Arema Armah or fitted to time series data either to better understand the data
itself or to predict future points in the series.
This is known as forecasting Arema models have two types.
There is non seasonal Arema and then there are seasonal arena.
And as you can probably guess not seasonal or the models are for non seasonal data and seasonal Orio
models are for seasonal data.
So we're going to start off by discussing non-sequel Arema models and then we'll move on to seasonal
Arema models in the Python examples that we'll be doing at the end of this section.
The course will be using seasonal Arema because it's kind of the more complex one.
And if you understand seasonal Arema you'll understand basic arena OK or even models are applied.
In some cases where they to show evidence of non stationary.
That is where an initial differencing step corresponding to the integrated part of the model can be
applied one or more times to eliminate this non stationary so differencing is actually a very simple
idea but will put it on hold for now and talk a little bit more about Arema in general.
So latish back on what that term differencing actually means.
It's a pretty simple concept.
But for now I want to talk about the major component of AREMA.
That is the auto regressive portion.
The integrated portion and that moving average portion so non seasonal ARIMA models are generally the
noted as Arema p d q where the parameters P D and Q are non-negative integers.
So let's discuss each of these components.
We'll start off with the auto regression component that is that p component.
A regression model that utilizes the dependent relationship between the current observation and observations
over a previous period.
So you can just imagine this as kind of a basic regression task.
So that's that portion of the model.
Then there's the integrated portion of the model and what that is.
It's differencing of observations that is subtracting an observation from an observation at that previous
time step in order to make the time series stationary.
And we'll discuss differencing in a lot more detail in just a little bit.
And this last model that we have is the moving average portion of the model.
Otherwise known as the q part.
And that's a model that utilizes the dependency between an observation and the residual air from the
moving average model apply to lags observations.
OK so we talked about these terms stationery versus non stationary data.
Let's actually discuss what those terms are and how we can visually see in data whether it's stationary
or non stationary.
So to effectively use Arema we need to understand stationary in our data.
So what makes the data stationary stationary series has a constant mean and variance over time a stationary
dataset will allow our model to predict that the mean and variance will be the same in future periods.
Let's take a look at a few examples visually and a few key elements that will allow us to easily identify
what a stationary dataset looks like.
The first key part of a stationary versey non stationary dataset is that the meaning has to be constant.
So the average value has to be constant throughout time.
So we can see here on our left in green we have a stationary dataset.
So even though there's some variance there we can see that on average that mean value is constant versus
non stationary data has a non-constant mean and we can see here we have this upward trend which means
that the average value is slowly increasing over time the other thing that we need to take note on is
that variance should not be a function of time.
So on the left we have stationary again where we can see that the actual variance tends to stay the
same over time here on the right we have non stationary data where you can see here that the variance
starts off small and then it gets bigger than it was small and it goes big again.
And somehow we can see that the variance is changing over time.
Starting small Going big small big versus on the left we can see that the variance whether it's big
or small it's not changing as a function of time as you go along the x axis and then the last aspect
that we should be aware of is that covariance should not be a function of time.
And visually you can see this in that non stationary data set.
So on the right we can see that non stationary even though that means tends to look average and even
the variance tends to look average or covariance.
That is visually how fast that variance is changing a long time is not stationary.
So you can see that cycle of a slow change in variance and then a quick change in variance.
A slow change in variance and a quick change in variance again.
So this one's a little harder to detect visually but you should be aware and there are mathematical
tests for this OK.
So as I mentioned there's mathematical tests so you don't just have to kind of look at data you can
actually mathematically test it to see if has stationary in it and a really common test is known as
the augmented.
TICKY FULLERTON test and we're going to see how we can use that test with pythoness that's models.
So if you've determined your data is not stationary either visually or mathematically with that sort
of decie full or test you will then need to transform it to be stationary in order to evaluate it.
And what type of Arema terms you're going to be using.
So one simple way to do this that we previously mentioned is through differencing and the actual idea
behind differencing is really quite simple.
So let's go ahead and see an example.
On the left we have the original dataset.
So imagine we have some data set and it goes at time point 1 2 3 4 and 5 and then we have various values
for it 10 12 a 14 and 7.
The very first difference what you end up doing is at time let's say to you subtract the previous time
value and then set that as your new value.
So we have 12 minus 10 is equal to 2.
And then for time 3 we end up doing 8 minus 12 is equal to negative 4 etc..
So that's known as the first difference.
Basically you take the value at time equals C and subtract that at the value of T minus 1 and that's
your first difference.
If you take a first difference and your data is not yet stationary after you either check it visually
or do have mathematical tests on it we can do is then take the second difference and second difference.
Same idea except now we're starting at time point three and doing the same subtraction.
So negative for minus to get negative 6.
Then we'd say 6 minus 4 or minus negative 4.
That gives you plus 10 then minus 7 minus 6 will and that gives you minus 13 etc. and you can keep taking
on as many differences as you need.
Just keep in mind that if you keep taking more and more differences you end up sacrificing a row of
data for every difference that you take.
So as I just mentioned you can continue differencing until you reach stat. which you can check visually
and mathematically each differencing step comes at the cost of losing a row of data which is not that
huge of a cost.
If you have a very large dataset what's nice about this idea of differencing is that for seasonal data
you can also differenced by a season.
For example if you had a monthly data with yearly seasonality that is every single row of data you had
represented one month of data you could difference by a time of 12 instead of just one.
And with pand those that would be really easy you would just use the dot shift method and instead of
applying one to it you would apply 12 to it.
In other common technique with seasonal ARIMA models is to combine both methods that is taking the seasonal
difference of the first difference.
So you end up taking the first reference and then after that you end up taking the seasonal difference.
If your season has to be yearly then you just do another shift by 12.
So now if your data in a stationary time series we can go back and discuss the p and q terms and how
we actually choose those values so we end up doing is you take your data.
You check that it's stationary.
You can use those differencing techniques we talked about to make sure it's stationary and then you
need to choose the p and q values to actually apply the auto regressive integrated and moving average
portions of the Arema model and a big part of how to actually choose those values has to do with autocorrelation
plots and partial autocorrelation plots.
So let's move on to discuss those type of plots in the very next lecture.
Thanks and I'll see you there.